EXECUTIVE SUMMARY.In many countries you can pay off police officers to ignore any crime, however horrific and devastating – it’s just a matter of price. In Zimbabwe a nine-year old girl was raped on her way to school by a man who infected her with HIV. The police initially arrested her attacker, but then released him in secret. The reason: he paid a bribe. At Transparency International we hear stories like this every day.That is why we publish research on what people say are the biggest sources of corruption in their lives, so that we can raise awareness of the scale of graft and to drive anti-corruption work to stop it. For the latest African edition of the Global Corruption Barometer, we partnered with the Afrobarometer, which spoke to 43,143 respondents across 28 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa between March 2014 and September 2015 to ask them about their experiences and perceptions of corruption in their country. Shockingly, we estimate that nearly 75 million people have paid a bribe in the past year – some of these to escape punishment by the police or courts, but many also forced to pay to get access to the basic services that they desperately need. A majority of Africans perceive corruption to be on the rise and think that their government is failing in its efforts to fight corruption; and many also feel disempowered as regards to taking action against corruption. In Sierra Leone, Nigeria, Liberia and Ghanai citizens are the most negative about the scale of corruption in their country.However, the results also highlight that there are a small number of countries in the region that are seen as doing quite well in addressing the scourge of corruption – where only a few people have to pay bribes or where citizens feel that they can contribute to stopping corruption. Citizens in Botswana, Lesotho, Senegal and Burkina Faso tend to have the most positive views compared with citizens from other countries in the region.The main finding of this report is that there is a clear disparity between a few strong performing countries in regard to anti-corruption and the many weak performers on anti-corruption across the continent. This finding contains both a hopeful message, that addressing corruption is indeed possible, as well as a disappointing message, as most African countries have failed to make headway in stemming the tide of corruption. As corruption can be a major hindrance for development and economic growth, and as it weakens people’s trust in government and the accountability of public institutions, this report calls on governments to act against the corruption which exists in their country.

CORRUPTION SEEN TO BE ON THE RISE.The majority of Africans (58%) say that corruption has increased over the past year. This is particularly the case in South Africa where more than four-in-five citizens (83%) say they have seen corruption rise recently.MOST GOVERNMENTS ARE FAILING TO MEET CITIZENS’ EXPECTATIONS IN REGARD TO FIGHTING CORRUPTION.There is no government which is rated positively on its anti-corruption efforts by a clear majority of its citizens. On the contrary, 18 out of 28 governments are seen as fully failing to address corruption by a large majority.POLICE AND PRIVATE SECTOR PERCEIVED AS MOST CORRUPT.The survey asked how much corruption there was in 10 key institutions and groups in society. Across the region, the police and business executives are seen to have the highest levels of corruption. While the police have regularly been rated as highly corrupt, the strongly negative assessment of business executives is new compared to previous Transparency International Global Corruption Barometer (GCB) survey rounds.BRIBERY AFFECTS MORE THAN ONE-IN-FIVE AFRICANS, AND DISPROPORTIONALLY AFFECTS THE POOR IN URBAN AREAS.22 percent of people that have come into contact with a public service in the past 12 months in Sub-Saharan Africa have paid a bribe, but the situation is worst in Liberia where nearly seven-in-ten paid a bribe. Across the continent, poor people are twice as likely as rich people to have paid a bribe, and in urban areas they are even more likely to pay bribes.
POLICE AND THE COURTS HAVE THE HIGHEST RATE OF BRIBERY.Out of six key public services, people who come into contact with the police and the courts are the most likely to have paid a bribe. This is consistent with previous Transparency International surveys and highlights the lack of progress made in addressing bribery in these two institutions, which are crucial for citizen security and the rule of law.MANY PEOPLE FEEL UNABLE TO CONTRIBUTE TO HELPING FIGHT CORRUPTION.People in the region are divided as to whether ordinary people can make a difference in the fight against corruption – just over half of people think that they can (53 percent), while 38 percent think they cannot. Reporting incidences when they occur, or saying no when asked to pay a bribe, are seen as the most effective things people can do. However, only roughly one-in-ten people who paid a bribe actually reported it.DESPITE THIS, TURNING BACK CORRUPTION IS POSSIBLE.There are a few countries in which citizens see low levels of corruption in their public institutions and see corruption as on the wane in their own country. The views of citizens in Botswana, Lesotho, Senegal and Burkina Faso are particularly favourable.
CORRUPTION SEEN TO BE ON THE RISE.Governments must finally deliver on their anti-corruption commitments made globally (the UN Convention against Corruption) and regionally (the African Union Convention on Combating Corruption).UN Convention signatory countries must actively support and use the results of the next Convention review cycle, which will look at related policies to prevent corruption and support asset recovery.The African Union and its members must provide the political will and financing needed to implement the review mechanism established for its anti-corruption convention.
MOST GOVERNMENTS ARE FAILING TO MEET CITIZENS’ EXPECTATIONS IN REGARD TO FIGHTING CORRUPTION.Governments must end impunity in their countries – whether in government, companies or organisations – by effectively investigating and prosecuting cases and eliminating the abuse of political immunity.Governments must strengthen and enforce legislation on politically-exposed persons and anti-money laundering to curb the high volume of illicit flows from the continent.Governments must end the secrecy around who owns and controls companies and other arrangements which enable collusion, self-dealing or deception in government processes, such as procurement.
POLICE AND PRIVATE SECTOR PERCEIVED AS MOST CORRUPT.Governments must show a sustained and deep commitment to acting on police corruption at all levels by promoting reforms that combine punitive measures with structural changes over the short- and medium-term.Companies need to transparently report their operations, activities and revenues on a country-by-country basis to build public trust and dispel perceptions of corruption.
BRIBERY AFFECTS MORE THAN ONE-IN-FIVE AFRICANS, AND DISPROPORTIONALLY AFFECTS THE POOR IN URBAN AREAS.Governments must effectively include anti-corruption measures and metrics as part of implementing and tracking progress on their Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) strategies.
POLICE AND THE COURTS HAVE THE HIGHEST RATE OF BRIBERY.Governments must invest in measures to strengthen access to justice and the rule of law in their countries, such as ensuring an objective and transparent process for appointing judges, protections for judicial salaries and working conditions, and clear criteria for case assignment.
MANY PEOPLE FEEL UNABLE TO CONTRIBUTE TO HELPING FIGHT CORRUPTION.Governments must create safe and effective conditions for the involvement of civil society in anti-corruption efforts, including their de jure and de facto operational and physical freedom. Governments must establish right to information and whistle-blower protection legislation to facilitate the role of civil society in making public institutions more transparent, accountable and corruption-free.

THE STATE OF CORRUPTION IN AFRICA – CITIZENS’ VIEWS.The Global Corruption Barometer seeks to put citizens’ views front and centre in the corruption debate, and to make governments aware of what their citizens think of their actions in regard to fighting corruption. The survey, which was conducted by the Afrobarometer, found that while many Africans view corruption as being on the rise in their own country, and believe their government is not doing well in tackling the issue, there are a small number of countries that are seen to be quite effective in addressing public sector graft.
UP OR DOWN? HOW IS THE LEVEL OF NATIONAL CORRUPTION SEEN AS CHANGING OVER TIME?The survey asked people how they thought corruption in their country had changed over the past year – whether it had increased, decreased or stayed the same – so that we could identify the corruption trend across the continent.Across the region the survey found that the majority of citizens believe that corruption is on the rise. Over half of people (58 percent) say that they think corruption has increased either somewhat or a great deal over the past year in their own country, while just under a quarter (22 percent) think that it has decreased, and just 14 percent think that it has stayed the same.When comparing the results of the different countries that were surveyed, people living in South Africa, Ghana and Nigeriavi were the most likely to say that they think corruption has risen in the 12 months prior to when the survey was conducted. In these countries three-quarters or more of respondents said corruption has increased either somewhat or a lot. The three countries which had the smallest proportion of citizens saying corruption has risen were Burkina Faso, Cote D’Ivoire and Mali – less than one-third of respondents answered that corruption has increased in the past 12 months.


22% of people in Africa think corruption has decreased.

14% of people in Africa think corruption has stayed the same.

58% of people in Africa think corruption has increased.


POLITICIANS, PUBLIC OFFICIALS OR BUSINESS EXECUTIVES – WHO IS SEEN AS MOST CORRUPT?The survey asked respondents how much corruption there was in 10 different powerful groups in their country – the political and government elite (the president’s office, members of parliament, government officials), public officials who work at the service level (tax officials, the police, judges and magistrates, local government councillors), and those who are not part of the public sector but who often wield strong influence (business executives, religious leaders and traditional leaders).
Looking at the results from across the region, the police are seen as the most corrupt group across the region, which is consistent with previous editions of the GCB. Almost half of respondents (47 percent) say that they thought either most or all police officers are corrupt. The police are followed by business executives, which are seen as the second most corrupt group (42 percent say most or all business executives are corrupt).Government officials and tax officials rank as the third and fourth most corrupt groups (38 percent and 37 percent respectively). Judges and magistrates, members of parliament, local government councillors and the office of the presidency all score similarly, with around a third of people saying they are affected by high levels of corruption (between 31 and 34 percent).
Traditional leaders and religious leaders are seen to be the least affected by corruption in the region, although 21 percent and 15 percent, respectively, say that most or all of these leaders are corrupt.

When looking at the results from each country, large proportions of citizens in Benin, Ghana, Liberia, Nigeria and Sierra Leone think that their public sector institutions are affected by high levels of corruption. In these countries, on average across each of the public sector groups, half of the population or more said that they thought most or all are corrupt.In contrast, citizens in Botswana, Cape Verde, Lesotho, Mauritius and Senegal perceive there to be very low levels of corruption in the public sector institutions. On average, less than a quarter of respondents said that most or all officials in these public sector institutions are corrupt.

Anti-corruption progress in Senegal.Since President Macky Sall came into office in Senegal in 2012 the country has passed a number of positive anti-corruption reforms, which may have contributed to Senegalese citizens being among some of the most positive in the region – with many saying corruption is on the decline, and people perceiving low levels of corruption across the public sector.A Ministry for the “Promotion of Good Governance Responsible for Relations with the Institutions” has been created to promote good governance across various government institutions and in the private sector. A National Office for the Fight against Fraud and Corruption has also been established. Subsequently, in July 2013 the Government adopted a National Strategy on Good Governance to improve the functioning of government and to improve transparency. A national law was also passed in April 2014 which requires elected officials to declare their assets.More recently, there have been signs of effective enforcement of the law: in March 2015 Karim Wade, former cabinet minister and son of former President Abdoulaye Wade, was tried and convicted of illicit enrichment and sentenced to six years’ imprisonment.

DOING WELL OR DOING BADLY? HOW AFRICANS RATE THEIR GOVERNMENTS’ ANTI-CORRUPTION EFFORTS.Understanding how ordinary people think their government is doing in regard to addressing corruption allows us to assess whether governments are perceived to be making the right steps and if they are communicating these efforts effectively to their citizens.Across the region the majority of people (64 percent) think their government is doing a poor job at handling corruption, suggesting greater efforts need to be taken by governments to clean up the public sector and to punish officials for their corrupt actions. Only a third of people (32 percent) think that their government was doing either fairly or very well at fighting corruption.Looking specifically at the country-level results, few governments were rated as doing particularly well at cleaning up government. In only three countries did a slightly greater proportion of citizens say that their government was doing well than said they were doing badly – Botswana, Lesotho and Senegal.Many governments received very poor ratings on their achievements in stopping corruption but citizens in Madagascar were the most critical, with nine-in-ten (90 percent) saying their government is doing either fairly or very badly. This result may in part be due to the revelation that as much as 40 percent of the country's budget is lost to corruption. In Benin, Liberia, Nigeria, South Africa and Zimbabwe people think poorly of their governments’ anti-corruption efforts with around four-in-five saying that their government is doing badly.

BRIBERY– WHAT SERVICES DO AFRICANS PAY BRIBES FOR?Through their contact with public services citizens are being exposed to corruption risks in their daily lives. Nearly 75 million people across the region are estimated to have paid a bribe during the last 12 months but in some countries bribery is far more rampant than in others. Unfortunately it is those who are meant to be upholding the law – the police and courts – who seem to be the most likely to be involved in bribery, and those who are the poorest in society who are the most likely to have to pay.HOW MANY PEOPLE PAID BRIBES?The survey asked people whether they had come into contact with six key public services – public schools, public healthcare, the police, courts, for official documents or for utilities – in the previous 12 months. For those who had come into contact with these services, they were asked whether they had paid a bribe, given a gift or provided a favour in order to get the services they needed.The results show that while there is a big problem with bribery in the region, it is not an endemic feature across the continent, with a small number of countries reporting very low rates of bribery.Across the region 22 percent of people who came into contact with at least one of the six public services in the past 12 months admitted that they paid a bribe. When extrapolating the proportion of bribe payers in each of the surveyed countries to their entire adult population, this suggests that nearly 75 million Africans have paid a bribe. Many people pay bribes on numerous occasions for their public services, making this practice even more of a burden on citizens: the majority of bribe-payers (62 percent) told us that they have paid bribes multiple times over the past year, either for the same public service or for different services.However, the risk of having to pay a bribe varies tremendously by country. Liberia has by far the highest rate of bribery of the countries that were surveyed, with 69 percent of people who came into contact with at least one of these six services having paid a bribe in the past year. This is followed by Cameroon, Nigeria and Sierra Leone which were found to have high bribery rates of between 41 and 48 percent. Cote d’Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya and Uganda also have bribery rates that are far higher than the regional average.Botswana, Mauritius and Cape Verde have the lowest bribery rates in the region, being on a par with low bribery rate countries on other continents (such as in Europe or the USA). Lesotho, Senegal, Swaziland, Namibia and South Africa also have bribery rates that are far lower than the average for the region with less than one-in-ten saying that they paid a bribe. This demonstrates that in a sizeable number of African countries, governments, the public sector and often also vigilant citizens have been able to successfully prevent this problem from significantly affecting public services on an endemic scale. Learning from these countries’ experiences of tackling bribery is key for developing effective anti-bribery approaches that are suitable for the African region.


Corruption and the Ebola crisis.From March 2014 to November 2015, around 11,300 people have died from the Ebola outbreak. The West African countries Liberia and Sierra Leone were the worst hit. With studies showing that corruption contributed to the slow and weak government responses to the crisis, tackling the rampant corruption should be considered a priority, to ensure that services can better handle such crises in the future.The survey found that in both of these countries there are very high bribery rates and the public sector is perceived to be affected by extensive levels of corruption compared with many other countries in the region. High levels of corruption may have hampered these countries’ responses to the Ebola crisis by illicitly diverting resources away from essential healthcare services in the years preceding the crisis. Relief funds which were dispersed to halt the spread of Ebola may also have been mismanaged, as found in an internal audit report released by the Sierra Leonean Auditor General in February 2015.There have also been some claims that Liberians were so distrustful of their government that they believed reports about Ebola had been fabricated to enable government employees to enrich themselves from aid from foreign donors and to embezzle funds from the World Health Organisation. This may have caused critical delays in the first response to the crisis.

WHO HAS TO PAY BRIBES?

Across Sub-Saharan Africa, in the past 12 months, 22% of public service users have paid a bribe, which is equivalent to nearly 75 million people.

YOUNG VS OLD.People younger than 55 years are more likely to pay a bribe for public services.

57% OF BRIBE PAYERS ARE MALE.

43% OF BRIBE PAYERS ARE FEMALE.

Males make up the majority of bribe payers.

Urban residents are more likely to have bribed: Public service users who live in cities and towns tend to be slightly more likely than rural residents to have paid a bribe.

BRIBERY AFFECTS THE POOREST MOST.

The poorest Africans are hit hardest by bribery: They are twice as likely as the most affluent in the region to have paid a bribe in the past 12 months.

1 IN 4 OF THE POOREST PEOPLE LIV- ING IN RURAL AREAS HAD TO PAY A BRIBE.

THIS ALMOST DOUBLES IN URBAN AREAS, WITH NEARLY 2 IN 5 OF THE POOREST PEOPLE LIVING IN CITIES AND TOWN HAVING PAID A BRIBE.

WHAT SERVICES ARE AFFECTED BY BRIBERY?
Transparency International wanted to find out which of the six key public services are particularly affected by bribery. As the services have different levels of usage (ranging from just 11 percent of Africans coming into contact with the courts, up to 63 percent for public hospitals), the results are based only on the responses of those who have come into contact with each service. This allows us to find out which service puts users at most risk of paying a bribe.
The survey finds a large difference in the reported bribery rates for the various public services. Bribery is most rampant in the courts and police force, with over a quarter of those who come into contact with each of these services saying that they had paid a bribe (28 and 27 percent respectively).
When coming into contact with utilities services provided by the government (such as water and electricity) or when asking for official documents (such as ID cards and permits), nearly one-in-five Africans paid bribes (19 percent and 18 percent, respectively).Schools and healthcare have the lowest bribery rates of the six services, although over one-in-ten (13 percent and 12 percent, respectively) of the people who came into contact with these services paid a bribe which demonstrates that this is still an unacceptable burden on many people in the region who use these essential services.Many users of these key public services are burdened by having to pay multiple bribes every year, rather than just once or twice. This is especially the case for those who come into contact with public hospitals, public utilities, police and courts – nearly half or more of the bribe-payers for these services had to pay multiple times.

Looking at the country-level bribery rates for the different services, the results show that all six services are comparatively clean in Botswana, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Lesotho, Mauritius, Namibia, Niger, Senegal and Swaziland, when compared with the regional averages. On the other hand, bribery is reported as rampant across all of the public services in Cameroon, Ghana, Guinea, Liberia, Nigeria, and Sierra Leone, where all the services have much higher bribery rates than the regional average.


PEOPLE’S ACTIONS – HOW AFRICANS WANT TO STOP CORRUPTION.Citizens should be able to play an important role in turning the tide against corruption – either through reporting corruption when they see it, refusing to pay bribes, or demanding governments take action against the corruption that they see in their country. The survey asked people across Africa whether they think that ordinary people can indeed make a difference, and in what ways they can be most effective at preventing graft.
CAN PEOPLE MAKE A DIFFERENCE?Generally speaking, people are divided about the issue of whether or not ordinary people can make a difference in fighting corruption in their country. While just over half (53 percent) answered in the affirmative, almost two-in-five (38 percent) feel disempowered.Citizens feel particularly effective as potential anti-corruption fighters in Botswana and Madagascar. In these countries 70 percent of more say that they think that ordinary people can make a difference. The result from Madagascar is particularly interesting given that its citizens were the most critical of their government’s anti-corruption performance, which suggests that although the public perceive the authorities to be not doing enough, they still feel that they themselves could have an impact.The public in Nigeria and Sierra Leone feel the least empowered to help fight corruption in their own countries, with less than two-in-five people agreeing that they can make a difference. People in Benin, Liberia, Niger and Zimbabwe are also very pessimistic.

HOW PEOPLE CAN STOP CORRUPTION.The survey also asked respondents what they think would be the most effective action that people can take in fighting corruption in their own country.Across the region, people generally think that reporting corruption incidents is the most effective action that people can take to tackle corruption (28 percent). The second most popular action is to refuse to pay bribes, which 21 percent of people say is the most effective action to take. All other actions were named by 5 percent or fewer people.

Worryingly, almost a quarter of people (23 percent) were pessimistic about the role people can play in their country in fighting corruption, saying that they thought there was nothing that they could do.Despite the fact that reporting corruption is seen by citizens as the most effective anti-corruption action, among those who have actually paid a bribe (see previous section), only one-in-ten bribe-payers (12 percent) said that s/he reported it. While this is a start, it indicates that much more should be done to encourage people to step forward to report graft when they experience it.To find out what lies behind these low levels of citizen reporting, the survey asked Africans what they think is the main reason why people do not report corruption incidents. The top reasons given were: people are afraid of the consequences (35 percent) and that it would not make a difference (14 percent). Reasons indicating a lack of knowledge about how or where to report were collectively mentioned by more than one-in-ten (13 percent), but reasons regarding lacking resources in terms of time or money were seen as much less relevant. Therefore, resources should be focused on protecting those who report corruption, making existing reporting mechanisms more effective, and awareness raising about how and where to report.

Reporting corruption in Madagascar. In 2010 Transparency International – Initiative Madagascar set up an anti-corruption legal advice centre to provide free support to witnesses and victims of corruption. The Centre works closely with municipal governments, and in one municipality they have helped to hold to account a corrupt official who was supporting illegal logging practices.xviIn this case a local committee initially used official reporting mechanisms to inform a forest ranger and the police that trees were being felled in the area to make charcoal without the proper permits – a practice that had cause a local spring to dry up, leaving five local villages without their main source of drinking water. However, the charcoal that was seized as evidence for the case disappeared.The committee then turned to the anti-corruption legal advice centre, which helped support them in filing a complaint with the ministry of forestry. The forest ranger was dismissed as a result.

CONCLUSION – HOW AFRICAN COUNTRIES MEASURE UP.This report has presented the findings from the latest edition of the GCB in Africa. Transparency International partnered with the Afrobarometer, who spoke to 43,143 people in 28 countries across the Sub-Saharan African region to understand public experiences and perceptions of corruption, and to put the views of ordinary people at the centre of corruption debates.Overall, the results present a bleak picture, with many Africans critical about the state of corruption in their country. Looking at the corruption scorecard on the next page, only a very few countries are rated green (positive) on any of the measures. Citizens across the continent clearly differ in how serious they deem the extent of the corruption challenge to be, with those in Botswana, Lesotho, Senegal and Burkina Faso giving more positive responses about the state of corruption in their country, while those in Sierra Leone, Nigeria, Liberia, and Ghana hold deeply negative views. In between these two extremes other countries are experiencing specific corruption challenges, such as high prevalence of bribery (for example in Cameroon or Cote d’Ivoire) or extremely negative assessments of the government’s anti-corruption efforts (for example in Benin, Madagascar, South Africa and Zimbabwe).
Across Africa the survey showed that it is the poorest people who are hardest hit by corruption as they are almost twice as likely to pay a bribe compared with more affluent Africans. Public sector graft presents an unacceptable burden for people who are already struggling to afford basic necessities like putting food on the table or accessing medical care. Transparency International thinks that tackling corruption and reducing poverty go hand in hand, and wants governments across the region, and in other parts of the world, to include accurate anti-corruption measures and metrics as part of implementing and tracking progress on their SDGs strategies.The region faces a serious dilemma in ridding itself of graft, because while people told us that reporting incidents of bribery is one of the best ways to stop corruption from happening, they also told us that many people do not report bribery because they are scared of suffering retribution and think reporting mechanisms are ineffective. In order to effectively prevent corruption in the region greater efforts need to be made to protect whistleblowers from retribution, improve the effectiveness of reporting channels, and educate people about how and where they can report corruption. Transparency International’s Advocacy and Legal Advice Centres can play an important role in providing safe ways to bring the corrupt to justice.
The survey also demonstrated that many people are pessimistic about whether ordinary people can make a difference. The survey comes at a time when many countries in the region have seen a shrinking of the space in which civil society can operate and hold governments to account. It is essential that governments create safe conditions for the effective involvement of civil society in anti- corruption activities, and governments need to guarantee the operational and physical freedom of such organisations. Future editions of the survey will monitor how public attitudes respond to government efforts in improving their transparency and accountability to citizens.